@comment $Id: filter-tutorial.texi,v 1.9 2000/03/28 16:45:36 nold Exp $

@node Filter Tutorial, Swapfile API, Filter API, Top
@chapter Filter Tutorial

This part of the document is about how to write filters for GLAME. It
only covers parts of this at the moment, but will evolve into a decent
filter programming tutorial with your help.

@menu
* Parameter Definition::	Talking about parameters, properties and protocols...
* Filter Categories::		Now what is this whole filter stuff anyway?
* Filter Skeleton::		What do I need to have in a glame filter set?
* Main Filter Method::		How does the @code{f()} function have to look like?
* Examples::                    Examples to clarify the @code{fbuf_*()} API
* Speeeed::                     How to optimize processing
@end menu

@node Parameter Definition, Filter Categories, , Filter Tutorial
@section Talking about parameters, properties and protocols...

When talking about filters in the following sections, we'll make use of
various flavours of @dfn{parameters} and @dfn{properties}. Some filters
export hooks to dynamically tune their internal behaviour. We call
them @dfn{parameters}. Parameters generally are user-settable,
while @dfn{properties} are only modified by the filters. But for terminal
confusion, properties can be influenced by parameters of course.

We have parameters at three places: the @dfn{filternode
parameters}, the @dfn{pipe source parameters} and the @dfn{pipe
destination parameters}. In the following we will not make a difference
between pipe source and destination parameters, we just call them
@dfn{pipe parameters}. Remember though, that each pipe has two sets of
parameters, one at the source end and one at the destination end.

As indicated by the name, @dfn{filternode parameters} are local to the
filternode, the instance of a filter for which the parameter was
defined. A good example for a filternode parameter is the
frequency range of a bandpass filter. @dfn{Pipe parameters} are local
to a pipe which is an instance of two ports---therefore two sets of
parameters exist for a single pipe, each defined at one of the ports.
Pipe parameters are local to the pipe, i.e. on automatic
ports multiple sets of parameters exist. Pipe parameters are not port
parameters. Pipe parameters are commonly used for e.g. gain values.

@dfn{Pipe properties} provide information shared between all data floating 
through the pipe. Pipe properties remain constant during a run of the
filter network. @dfn{Buffer properties}---the information coded into the
filter buffer headers---are local to a buffer and are not required to be
constant in any way. Sampling rate is probably the most common example
of a pipe property. A buffer property for example could be a timestamp.

Buffer property definitions are local to a @dfn{filter protocol}.
Filter protocols expose additional per-buffer information to the filters
by prepending a protocol specific header to the buffer. Multiple
buffer properties can be defined in one header.


@node Filter Categories, Filter Skeleton, Parameter Definition, Filter Tutorial
@section Now what is this whole filter stuff anyway?
In GLAME there are four different kinds of filters. For each you have to care
about different methods to ensure correct operation. The first three
share (by definition) the following property: they all use nothing
but SAMPLEs as their inputs/outputs.

So to begin with the fourth kind of filter, the one operating on types
different from SAMPLE as well. For this kind
you may need to re-implement every method in the filter struct. If you
want to implement such a complex filter, contact 
@email{glame-devel@@lists.sourceforge.net}
for advice.

@findex connect_out
@findex fixup_param
The first kind of filters summarizes those which have no input at all. 
This is
the class of @dfn{generators}. Generators have to ensure that the pipes
connected to them are assigned the correct type and type parameters.
Therefore they all need to provide the @code{connect_out()} method. If they
do have filter parameters which affect the output type/parameters, they also
have to provide the @code{fixup_param()} method. Example for this class
of filters are the sine filter in @file{waveform.c} and the
@code{read_file_f()} filter in @file{file_io.c}.

The second kind of filters comprises of those which have no output. 
This is the class of @dfn{sinks}. Sinks don't have to care about 
all that much. Everything they
need to setup can be done in the main filter method. So usually those
filters do not provide another method apart from @code{f()}. An example for
this class of filters is the @code{drop_f()} filter in 
@file{basic.c}.

@findex connect_out
@findex fixup_param
@findex fixup_pipe
The third kind of filters are the inbetween filters which require
connected input and output channels. Let's call them
@dfn{effects}. Effects have to provide a @code{connect_out()} method, if
they change any of the pipe properties (i.e. what comes out is
different from what comes in, like in a resample case). They also have
to provide the @code{fixup_param()} and the @code{fixup_pipe()} methods
if there are dependencies between the filter or port parameters and the
output pipe properties or between the input pipe properties and the
output pipe properties (different from a one-to-one mapping).

@node Filter Skeleton, Main Filter Method, Filter Categories, Filter Tutorial
@section What do I need to have in a glame filter set?
You need the following functions and methods:
@table @code
@item <your_filtersetname>_register()
A filter register function of the name @code{<your_filtersetname>_register()} 
which returns 0 on success and -1 on any error.
@findex f
@item f() 
The main filter method @code{f()}. You need this for each filter contained
in the filter set.
@item other filter methods
You may need to include other filter specific methods, too. See above for
generic hints on which methods you may need.
@end table

@findex f
@node Main Filter Method, Examples, Filter Skeleton, Filter Tutorial
@heading How does the @code{f()} function have to look like? Are there any restrictions?
Yes, of course there are!

@code{f()} should begin with checking the current setup for suitability:
look at the parameters and input types/formats. And it should set up
all necessary local things. @emph{After} this initialisation the macro
@findex FILTER_AFTER_INIT
@code{FILTER_AFTER_INIT;} has to appear! 
Before this macro you may simply return -1
to denote an error, returning with no error is not allowed.
After @code{FILTER_AFTER_INIT;} you should do the actual filter work, i.e.
accept and send data through the ports.
The main part of the filter and the cleanup part (freeing of all
allocated local data, etc.) have to be seperated by placing the macro 
@findex FILTER_RETURN
@findex FILTER_BEFORE_CLEANUP
@code{FILTER_BEFORE_CLEANUP;}.
Neither in the main part, nor in the cleanup part may you just return with
a return value of -1 (i.e. just fail). Instead you have to cleanup yourself,
including sending @code{EOF}s to your output ports. So basically you may fail
in the initialisation part, but nowhere else. The cleanup section must end
with a call to @code{FILTER_RETURN}.

@findex FILTER_DO_CLEANUP 
@findex FILTER_ERROR_RETURN
@findex FILTER_ERROR_CLEANUP
For your convenience, there's a set of macros to ease the task of meeting
those constraints. @code{FILTER_DO_CLEANUP;} is used to jump from the init 
section to the cleanup section. It does not make the filter fail, however.
To return with an error, use @code{FILTER_ERROR_RETURN(msg_string);}. 
@code{FILTER_ERROR_CLEANUP(msg_string);} makes the filter fail as well but jumps
to the cleanup section first. Obviously, @code{FILTER_ERROR_RETURN();} and
@code{FILTER_ERROR_CLEANUP();} may only be used in the init section. 
@code{FILTER_DO_CLEANUP;} can be handy in the main loop. 

@findex FILTER_CHECK_STOP
@findex FILTER_BEFORE_STOPCLEANUP
Another section primitive is the @code{FILTER_CHECK_STOP;} macro which you
should use inside all operating loops to check for external stop, pause or
terminate queries. The corresponding cleanup section after 
@code{FILTER_BEFORE_STOPCLEANUP;}
is jumped to if a terminating request has to be fulfilled.

Typical code looks like this:

@example
static int myfilter_f(filternode_t *n)
@{
	(...)	/* Initalisations, setups... */

	if (!(bar = (bar_t *)malloc(sizeof(bar_t))))
		FILTER_ERROR_RETURN("Not enough memory for bar!");

	if (!(baz = open(mydev, myflags)))
		FILTER_ERROR_CLEANUP("Unable to open device!");

	FILTER_AFTER_INIT;

	while (a < b) @{
		FILTER_CHECK_STOP;
		(...) /* Do real work */
	@}

	FILTER_BEFORE_STOPCLEANUP;
	FILTER_BEFORE_CLEANUP;

	if (baz != -1)
		close(baz);
	free(bar);
	FILTER_RETURN;
@}
@end example

@strong{You may not use any of the @code{?buf_*()}
functions in the init section (DEADLOCK!!!)} 
(Well, @code{?buf_alloc()} is allowed, if you really need it)

For more complex filters which require some sort of backlog of sample
data or which do modify an input stream the following issues have to
be cared about:

You should not allocate a ringbuffer or backlog storage via malloc,
neither should you simply copy the data---this is not necessary. In
fact it is completely broken. You should instead just keep all the
sbuf's around that you need later (of course ref'ing and unref'ing them
at the appropriate time)

@findex sbuf_alloc
@findex sbuf_make_private
If your filter in priciple would support in-place read-modify-write of
the data you should not allocate new buffers for the output using
@code{sbuf_alloc()}. Instead you should grab the source buffer and do a
@code{sbuf_make_private()} on it taking the returned pointer as the
``new'' input buffer which you may modify now and queue as
output.

@findex sbuf_alloc
@findex sbuf_make_private
Once again, as this is a vital point:
If you do any modification of any buffer (including those which you just
allocated privately using @code{sbuf_alloc()} or friends) 
you must get the write-enabled buffer by calling @code{sbuf_make_private()}
and use the return value as the buffer to be written to!

@node Examples, Speeeed, Main Filter Method, Filter Tutorial
@section Examples

To clarify the reference counting and locking issues, in the following several
valid and invalid example uses of the API are given. They are valid for each
of the filter buffer protocols such as the sbuf protocol.

Valid just-forward buffers from input to output:
@example 
@group
@findex fbuf_get
@findex fbuf_queue
buf = fbuf_get(in);
fbuf_queue(out, buf);
@end group
@end example
@noindent
This is valid because @code{fbuf_get()} will get us a reference on the filter
buffer and @code{fbuf_queue()} eats it, i.e. the reference gets forwarded, too.

Invalid attempt to forward a buffer to two outputs:
@example
@group
@findex fbuf_get
@findex fbuf_queue
buf = fbuf_get(in);
fbuf_queue(out1, buf);
fbuf_queue(out2, buf);
@end group
@end example
@noindent
This is invalid because you don't have any reference left after the
first @code{fbuf_queue()}, i.e. there is no reference you can forward to the
second @code{fbuf_queue()}.

Valid but possibly ineffective just-forwarding:
@example
@group
@findex fbuf_get
@findex fbuf_ref
@findex fbuf_queue
@findex fbuf_unref
buf = fbuf_get(in);
fbuf_ref(buf);
fbuf_queue(out, buf);
fbuf_unref(buf);
@end group
@end example
@noindent
While being valid, this example illustrates ineffective use of references.
As you don't need to touch the buffer after @code{fbuf_queue()}, 
you don't need to get an additional reference and neither need to drop it again.Such use will cause a @code{fbuf_make_private()} in the destination filter to 
potentially copy the buffer while a perfectly valid zero-copy 
operation was possible.

Invalid modifying and forwarding of a buffer:
@example
@group
@findex fbuf_get
@findex fbuf_ref
@findex fbuf_buf
@findex fbuf_unref
@findex fbuf_queue
buf = fbuf_get(in);
fbuf_ref(buf);
fbuf_buf(buf)[0] = 1;
fbuf_unref(buf);
fbuf_queue(out, buf);
@end group
@end example
@noindent
This is invalid as the additional @code{fbuf_ref()} does not provide you with
a private modifable buffer, but just ensures that nobody else does
write to or destroy the buffer (which one can't anyway as you are 
holding a reference already---the one got by @code{fbuf_get()}).
The correct solution is to do:
@example
@group
@findex fbuf_get
@findex fbuf_make_private
@findex fbuf_buf
@findex fbuf_queue
buf = fbuf_get(in);
buf = fbuf_make_private(buf);
fbuf_buf(buf)[0] = 1;
fbuf_queue(out, buf);
@end group
@end example



@node Speeeed, , Examples, Filter Tutorial
@section Speeeed

FIXME - this section still needs to be written. Topics: constructing efficient
loops, using the streaming macros.

