@comment $Id: gui.texi,v 1.21 2002/01/09 19:29:41 richi Exp $

@node Graphical Frontend, Console Frontend, Quick Start Guide, Top
@chapter Graphical Frontend (glame)

Nonsurprisingly, GLAME's graphical frontend is called @file{glame}. Usually, it
will be invoked without any arguments. An optional file name may be given
though, indicating an alternative location of GLAME's internal swapfile.
@xref{The Main Window}, for details.

A note to the DIY folks: When running @file{glame} straight from its source
tree without prior installation, @code{glame/src/} has to be your current
working directory. Otherwise, @file{glame} won't be able to find its plugins.

The graphical frontend consists of three parts. The main window, also called
the Swapfile GUI, is the only one active right at the beginning. The wave
editor and the filternetwork editor can be activated from there. Controlling
@file{glame} is supposed to be rather intuitive. Should you ever feel lost,
just try pressing the right mouse button, and a context sensitive menu will pop
up and hopefully present you with the option you were looking for. If you are
looking for a list of keybindings for the current window try pressing the
@code{F1} key. The context sensitivity buzzword also applies to GLAME's online
help. Just push the button and hope for your preferred gnome help browser
being able to display texinfo docs. (The standard gnome-help is.) 

@menu
* The Main Window::
* The Timeline::
* The Wave Editor::
* The Filternetwork Editor::
* Dialogs::
@end menu

@node The Main Window, The Timeline, , Graphical Frontend
@section The Main Window

On startup, @file{glame} will present you with an application window in
well-known GNOME design that contains a tree view of the so-called
@dfn{swapfile} currently in use. Representations of all the sound tracks you
want to edit will be stored here, so it's certainly a wise idea to put the
swapfile on a partition with plenty of free space. By default, the swapfile
resides in @file{~/.glameswap}, but you can configure its location in the
preferences window available from the @dfn{Settings} menu. Note that you need to
restart @file{glame} for the change to become active.

Within the swapfile, individual audio tracks are combined to @dfn{projects}.
You can create new projects using the entry @dfn{New Project} in the
@dfn{Project} menu.  This will insert a new item into the tree view of the
swapfile and pop up a field where you can edit the project's name.
Double-clicking on an item allows you to change the name later as well.

Now you're all set to start importing @dfn{files} into your new project, or to
subdivide it further into @dfn{groups}. A context sensitive menu offering
operations on groups or items respectively pops up when you press the
right mouse button. Those are your options:

@subsection Operations on groups

@table @code
@item Edit 
pops up a new window of the wave editor @pxref{The Wave Editor} containing 
all items of the group, where you can easily modify them. This operation is
not allowed for groups that in turn contain further sub-groups. Opening
a wave editor can be done by using the @code{w} key, too.

@item Timeline
pops up a new window of the timeline @pxref{The Timeline} containing all items
of the group. This operation is not allowed for single items.

@item Delete
deletes the current group and all its items.

@item Add group
adds a new group to the current group.

@item Add clipboard
adds the contents of the clipboard as a new group to the current
group. The clipboard's contents are populated via the edit operations in
the wave editor.

@item Add mono wave
adds a new mono wave to the current group. This is useful when you want to
start recording a new track, or paste some random stuff into a separate location.

@item Add stereo wav
Same as above, but adds two track for stereo recording instead of a single one.

@item Link selected
links the selected item into the current group. Linking means that a change on
the link will also modify the original and vice versa.

@item Copy selected
copies the selected item into the current group. Unlike linking, copying
creates a distinct group, meaning that a change to the copy will not alter the
original and vice versa.

@item Merge with parent
moves all the current group's children up one level and deletes the current
group.

@item Flatten
merges all children of the current group into the minimum number of vertically
aligned tracks all starting at horizontal position zero and of the same length.
From a more practical edge, use this option to render a multi-track recording
in, say, two stereo tracks.

@item Apply operation
applies the selected operation to the whole current item or group. Useful
operations include things like normalize.

@item Import...
imports a file as a sub-group into the current group. Import is done
through a powerful import dialog which is described in the dialogs
section.

@item Export...
exports all children of the group as an ordinary sound file. Export
is done through a powerful export dialog which is described in the
dialogs section.
@end table

@subsection Operations on items

@table @code
@item Edit
pops up a new window of the wave editor @pxref{The Wave Editor},
where you can modify the selected item. Opening
a wave editor can be done by using the @code{w} key, too.

@item Delete
deletes the current item.

@item Group
puts the current item into a new group.

@item Apply operation
exports all children of the group as an ordinary sound file. Export
is done through a powerful export dialog which is described in the
dialogs section.

@item Export...
exports the current item as an ordinary sound file. Export
is done through a powerful export dialog which is described in the
dialogs section.
@end table

Sequencing multiple waves in the main window is rather easy.  Using drag and
drop while pressing some modifier keys, you can move waves between horizontally
(hbox) and vertically (vbox) sequenced boxes (groups).  See below for a list of
available modifier keys.

To move a wave to a different place first hold down the
proper modifier to select the mode, then select the item you
want to move with the left mouse button and start dragging it. The
destination is located just before the wave you drop onto, or at the last
position of the group you drop onto respectively.

The following two modes are supported and can be selected via the specified
modifier keys:

@table @code
@item CTRL
moves an item into a vbox. Here items are sorted one track per item.

@item SHIFT
moves an item into a hbox. Here items are sequenced horizontally, all
belonging to the same track.
@end table

While dragging, you can see the mouse cursor change from a
circle (indicating a drop at the current position is not possible which
in turn indicates a wrong group type of the current group) to a
hand (indicating a drop is possible). You can cancel a drop by dropping
back on the original dragged item.

If you want to change a vbox into a hbox or vice versa, you need to go through
an intermediate group. First create a dummy group and start moving items there.
Then move items back to the original group with the right mode.
Note that you can move whole groups at once. So sequencing stereo
waves is possible, too, without breaking the stereo groupings.

In the main window's tree view you can use the following keyboard
shortcuts to change the waves speaker positions. The active
wave is denoted by the item the mouse is pointing at.

@table @code
@item CTRL-l
associates the active wave with the left channel.

@item CTRL-r
associates the active wave with the right channel.

@item CTRL-m
associates the active wave with both channels (mono).
@end table


The following items are present in the @dfn{Project} menu:

@table @code
@item New Project
Creates a new project (a toplevel group).

@item Edit File
Very quick shortcut to edit one file. File selection is done through the import
dialog. A waveedit window is popped up with the selected file. Note that
the file is not permanently stored in GLAME's swapfile, but instead
is removed from it once you close the waveedit window. So you really want
to re-export the file once you are finished editing.

@item Import...
Imports a file into the GLAME swapfile without creating a project first.
This is useful for quick editing tasks which don't involve multiple files.

@item Empty [deleted]
Deletes all entries in the @code{[deleted]} folder. This operation cannot
be undone. Deleted elements are usually just moved to the @code{[deleted]}
folder so you can undo deletes by just moving items back. Emptying the
@code{[deleted]} folder can also be done by deleting the @code{[deleted]}
folder itself.

@item Show console
By selecting @code{Show console}, you get access to the
powerful backend of glame that can be controlled via a scheme scripting
language. Or just watch the error logs that pop up here as well.

@item Sync
Syncs the metadata of the swapfile to disk. That's mostly a debugging aid that
you usually should not need to invoke.

@item Exit
Exits GLAME. The current state of the swapfile is saved and the project
tree will persist in its current state.
@end table

These are the items of the @code{Filternetwork} menu:

@table @code
@item New Filternetwork
Opens a new empty window of the filternetwork editor.

@item Open...
Opens a saved filternetwork in a new window of the filternetwork editor.

@item Load Plugin
You can manually load plugins into glame by using the @code{Load Plugin}
menu item from the filternetwork menu. This is useful for instance to use
external LADSPA plugins or custom filternetworks you didn't put into
the default GLAME search directory.
@end table


From the @code{Settings} menu you can invoke the preferences window, from
the @code{Help} menu you can invoke a gnome help browser with this
documentation, or jump directly to the quick start guide.



@node The Timeline, The Wave Editor, The Main Window, Graphical Frontend
@section The Timeline

@strong{The timeline view is highly experimental and may cause other
parts of GLAME to fail operating on modified tracks. You can usually
recover from this situation by flattening the affected subtree, but
this may be not the thing you want to do. Be warned.}

The timeline pops up when the @code{Timeline} function is applied to a
group in the main window. The timeline presents a time vs. track view
of the group. At the top of the window there is a ruler which shows
the time in seconds.

The active item and group appear highlighted. You can move the active
item horizontally (in time) using the mouse by clicking and dragging.
You can move items vertically (changing the track an item is in) by
using the up and down arrow keys. You can move whole groups vertically
by using the up and down arrow keys in conjunction with the shift
modifier key.

Like in any other window, the @code{Close} and @code{Help} toolbar entries
close the window, or bring up the gnome help browser with this documentation,
respectively.

@node The Wave Editor, The Filternetwork Editor, The Timeline, Graphical Frontend
@section The Wave Editor

The wave editor pops up when the @code{Edit} function is applied to either a
group or a single item of the swapfile tree.
Editing is done on all items of a particular group
at once. Functions to edit and explore the current items can be reached via
the right mouse button or the toolbar. The wave editor is also reached
through the @code{Edit File} menu entry or the @code{w} accelerator.

Simple editing can be done using the ordinary @code{Cut}, @code{Copy},
@code{Paste}, @code{Delete}, @code{Undo} and @code{Redo} operations
inside the @code{Edit} submenu, that work on the current selection in
the active wave widget. You can cut and paste between different wave
widgets, if the numbers of channels match. When you operate on multiple
views of the same wave item at once, they will be kept in sync
automatically.

To control the view use the @code{View} submenu which contains the
items @code{Zoom to selection}, @code{Zoom in}, @code{Zoom out},
@code{View all} and @code{Goto marker}. The zoom in, zoom out and
view all functionalities can also be reached from the appropriate
toolbar entries.

To specify the current selection simply use the mouse and drag it with
the left mouse-button pressed. Alternatively you can use the @code{Select none} 
or @code{Select all} menu items from the @code{Select} submenu or the
corresponding buttons in the toolbar to remove
the actual selection or select the whole wave. Pressing shift and the
left mouse-button selects everything starting from the marker position (which
you can set using the left mouse-button) to the current position. The selection
and the marker position can be changed with dragging the marker or the
selections left or right edge (the cursor will change if you move over them).

As usual, the @code{Close} and @code{Help} menu entries close the window, or
bring up the gnome help browser with this documentation, respectively.  Those
items can also be reached from the toolbar.

Using the @code{Play all} and @code{Play selection} commands the whole wave or
the selected part will be sent to the default audio output device. Using the
@code{Record at marker} and @code{Record into selection} commands you can
sample from the default audio input device either starting at the marker
position and until you press the @code{STOP} button, or just inside the
selection. Using the play button from the toolbar will start playing either the
current selection or from the marker position if no selection is active and
will advance it until you either press the stop button (which will appear at
the place of the play button after start) or the wave has ended. Playing can be
reached through the @code{Space} keyboard shortcut which does the same as the
toolbar play button.  Pressing @code{SHIFT-Space} will loop the current
selection or the whole wave.

The @code{Apply operation} submenu allows you to apply operations like
normalize or fade to the current selection. Some operations pop up windows
for additional arguments.

The @code{Apply filter} submenu allows you to apply a pre-existing
filter to the active selection. Inside the apply window the list of
available parameters for the filter will appear which you may edit. With
the preview button you can figure out what the result after applying the
filter will sound like. You can abort the preview by pressing the
preview button again. Press the apply button if you are satisfied with
the setup. Press the cancel button if you don't want to modify the wave.

Alternatively, you can pop up the filternetwork editor
@pxref{The Filternetwork Editor}, where you can construct a custom
filter or use @code{Apply custom...} which creates a filternetwork
framework containing necessary inputs and outputs specified by the
current selection.

A shortcut to the export functionality is embedded in the toolbar
as a @code{Save} item. This is especially useful for waveedits
opened through the @code{Edit File} menu entry as this one does not
show the wave in the swapfile tree.

@node The Filternetwork Editor, Dialogs, The Wave Editor, Graphical Frontend
@section The Filternetwork Editor

The filternetwork editor is opened when you choose one of the custom
functions in the wave editor, or the item @code{New Filternetwork} in
the @code{Filternetwork} menu of the main window. The filternetwork editor
comprises of a tool bar at the top of the window to execute, save and apply
other functions, and a main canvas for connecting and adding
new nodes to the network. A preexisting network can be edited by opening
it from the @code{Open...} item in the @code{Filternetwork} menu of the
main window.

All functionality in the editing window is controlled via context sensitive
menus bound to the right mouse button or configurable shortcuts.

Pressing the right mouse-button over the canvas background will pop up a menu
containing the list of available plugins.  Plugins are bundled into categories
to speed up finding the desired item.  Selecting one will add a node cloned
from the corresponding plugin to the network. A special item, @code{Paste
selected} at the bottom of the menu will paste the last copied node collection
at the current location.  When a new node is added, its icon appears on the
editing canvas.  It shows its input ports (if available) on the left, and
output ports on the right. If no ports of a type are available, the
corresponding side bar appears gray.

To connect two plugins, click on the output port using the left mouse button,
and drag the appearing pipe to the desired input port. If a connection is
possible, a pipe connection will be drawn. To manipulate per-pipe parameters of
the connected nodes, a context menu is attached to the small black ball placed
in the middle of the pipe.

Clicking with the left mouse button on a item will highlight it with a light
blue frame, thus marking it as selected. Alternatively, nodes can be selected
by clicking with the left mouse button into empty space in the editor, holding
it down and dragging the appearing box over the desired nodes in well known
file-manager fashion. You can alter selections by holding down the shift or
control modifier keys. Pressing one of the modifier keys while selecting will
add the selected icon to the current selection.

Selections may be manipulated in a number of fashions. A selection can be
collapsed by either choosing the corresponding context menu in the node menu or
the @code{c} shortcut.  Once a selection is collapsed, a new node appears in
place of it. Connections to nodes in the selection to outside nodes are saved
and ports appear on the collapsed node.  Collapsed selections are real new
subnets and may be saved and opened down, and just as any node representing a
network expanded in-place using the corresponding menu entry or the @code{e}
shortcut.

Finally, if you hover over an icon or port or the circle contained in a pipe
for a little while, the current parameter settings are shown, and the node is
raised to the top.  The hovering delay can be adjusted in the preferences
window.  The same applies for the connection between two nodes.

Pressing the right mouse button over a network node will pop up a menu
with the following items:

@table @code
@item Properties
Opens a property dialog which lets you modify the network node's parameters.
If you have selected multiple nodes of the same type and open a property
dialog of one, this property dialog will modify all nodes parameters at
once, that is they appear linked.

@item Redirect parameter
Opens a dialog where you can create network-wide parameters (which are
visible if you use the network as plugin from inside other networks)
which map to parameters of nodes inside the network. You can delete
network-wide parameters via the toolbar @code{Properties} dialog.

@item Delete
Deletes the current node from the network and kills all connections to/from
it.

@item Copy selected
Copies the set of selected nodes to the clipboard. It can be replicated
using the @code{Paste selection} menu entry from the node addition menu.

@item Collapse
Collapses the current set of selected nodes to a sub-network which will
be embedded in the current network. This network can be edited if
opened via the @code{Open down} menu entry.

@item Expand
Expands the current node, replacing it with its network contents.

@item Open down
Opens a new network editor window for the current node, exposing its
internal structure for editing.

@item About node
Opens a dialog with the description for the node, its ports and
parameters.

@item Help
Opens a gnome help browser with the documentation for the current node.
@end table


Pressing the right mouse button over a port will pop up a menu with
the following items:

@table @code
@item Redirect port
Creates a new network-wide port which maps to the current one. A dialog
will ask you for a name for the new port. You can delete network-wide
ports via the toolbar @code{Properties} dialog.
@end table

Pressing the right mouse-button over the pipe bubble will pop up a menu
with the following items:

@table @code
@item Source properties
Opens a property dialog which lets you modify the parameters for the
source end of the current pipe.

@item Destination properties
Opens a property dialog which lets you modify the parameters for the
destination end of the current pipe.

@item Delete
Kills the current pipe.
@end table


There are a few keyboard shortcuts which expose additional features:

@table @code
@item d
Deletes all nodes of the current selection including pipes to/from them.

@item g
Groups the current selection. Grouping will let you move the nodes as
one item, exposing no additional features.

@item u
Ungroups the current selected group.

@item c
Collapses the current selection.

@item e
Expands the current node.
@end table


The created network can be executed with the corresponding button in the
toolbar. At execution time this button turns into a stop button which
can be used to abort executing the network.  If anything is not set up
correctly, the malicious plugin will be drawn in red, and the error will
be displayed when hovering over it.

Once you found your network to be adequate, you may save it using the
@code{Save} button in the toolbar. You can also register the network as a new
plugin that can be used in other networks. Before that, you have to add ports
to your toplevel and/or redirect parameters from nodes. Ports can be redirected
by choosing the @code{Connect to external port} from the context menu of the
port. Parameters are redirected by choosing @code{redirect parameters} from the
context menu of the node.  You can delete or look at the external interface by
selecting the @code{properties} button.

As a final feature, the zoom level can be adjusted with the @code{zoom in}
and @code{zoom out} buttons. The @code{View all} button recenters your
view and adjusts the scrollable region.



@node Dialogs, , The Filternetwork Editor, Graphical Frontend
@section Dialogs

@menu
* The Preferences Dialog::
* The Import Dialog::
* The Export Dialog::
* The Apply Filter Dialog::
@end menu

@node The Preferences Dialog, The Import Dialog, , Dialogs
@subsection The Preferences Dialog

From within the preferences dialog, which you can reach from the
main windows @dfn{Settings} menu, you can change GLAME's configuration
including the swapfile setup and your audio setup. Note that some
changes take effect only after restarting GLAME.

The preferences dialog presents you with three tabs, namely the
@dfn{Swapfile}, @dfn{Filternetwork} and @dfn{Audio I/O} tabs.
We're going through them separately.

The first tab is the @dfn{Swapfile} tab which has the following
entries:
@table @code
@item Swapfile Path
Here you can configure where GLAME should place its internal representation
of the audio data. Note that GLAME uses this as a permanent storage to save
the complete application state. The swapfile's contents survive a restart.
Changes of the swapfile path take place after a GLAME restart only.

@item Depth of undo stack
Here you can configure the amount of edit steps you want to be able to
undo. This is a global number. Remember that each step of undo needs
space in the swapfile.

@item Caching
You are not supposed to change the caching parameters if you don't known what's
going on internally. The only parameter you may want to tune is the @dfn{maximum
virtual memory used for caching} parameter--if you have lots of ram. This
parameter is in bytes, and if you change it, you need to change the number of
cached memory mappings by the same factor (it's a good idea to scale the other
ones, too, but thats not necessary and may break for Linux kernels older than
2.4).
@end table


The @code{Filternetwork} tab lets you configure some UI parameters
which are

@table @code
@item Property popup timeout
The time until the description properties pop up.

@item Mac mode
Maps other-than-left mouse-button operations to multi-clicks on
the left button. This is only useful if you are using mice with less
than two buttons.
@end table


The @code{Audio I/O} tab lets you configure the default audio input
and output device.

@table @code
@item Default input plugin
Here you can select (or edit) the plugin which should be used for
audio input. This should be @code{oss_audio_in} or @code{alsa_audio_in}
for most Linux boxes.

@item Default input device
Specify the input device corresponding to the sound-card you want to
record from. For OSS, this will be one of the @code{/dev/dsp} devices,
for alsa @code{plughw:0,0} or similar.

@item Default output plugin
Like for the input case this is the plugin you want to use for audio
output.

@item Default output device
Device settings for audio output.

@item Size hint for audio buffers
This number specifies the default size of audio fragments that
get passed through the audio processing networks of GLAME. Choose
large values (1024) for slow machines, low values (128) for low
latency networks. The minimum internal latency can be calculated
as size hint divided by the samplerate (128 / 44100 Hz = 2.9 ms).
Note that the audio fragment size is usually limited by your audio
hardware, so this is only a hint and specifying values less than
32 will probably only hurt performance.
@end table

Note that if you have certain sound daemons running such as @code{artsd}
from KDE or @code{esd} from GNOME you may need to kill them before you
can access your audio devices from within GLAME.


@node The Import Dialog, The Export Dialog, The Preferences Dialog, Dialogs
@subsection The Import Dialog

The import dialog is spawned by selecting the menu entries "Edit File" or
"Import" from the main window. This dialog is mostly self explaining. Select
a file by typing its name, or search it with the file browser. There some other
buttons you can toggle:

@table @code
@item Get RMS & DC Offset
Extract statistic information from the selected audiofile. RMS is the root mean 
square of the select file, which gives a measure of the file's signal amplitude.
DC Offset shows the mean deviation of the signal from zero. For a perfectly
symmetric sampler hardware, the dc offset should be zero. In case your soundcard
records an asymmetric signal, this is the measure for it. You can remove such
a dc offset with a @pxref{highpass} filter with cutoff frequency set to 0 Hz.

@item Resample
If you check the resample button, you can enter your desired sample frequency.
The file is then resampled to this frequency while importing. Note: The current
resampling is FFT based. If you select a new frequency whose ratio to the old
one is other than a power of 2, resampling can be very slow.

@item Import
Starts the import of the file.

@item Cancel
Cancels the current action.
@end table

@node The Export Dialog, The Apply Filter Dialog, The Import Dialog, Dialogs
@subsection The Export Dialog

The export dialog appears in case you select "Export..." from the popup menu or
@pxref{The Wave Editor}. The dialog contains the following buttons:

@table @code
@item File Format
You can either select "auto" or a specific filetype supported by libaudiofile.
In case you select "auto" the type is chosen by the suffix of the file.

@item Compression Type
If this button is active, you can choose a compression codec.

@item Sample Format
Here you can choose the format of a single sample. Note: Not all sample types
work with all formats. In case your combination is not supported an error
requester will pop up.

@item Render Options
You have three choices:

@table @code
@item original
The number of channels in your current project is preserved while saving, e.g.
you can save a wav file with an arbitrary number of channels. This is in fact
supported by the standard. Good luck hunting applications that implement it,
though.

@item mono
The project is rendered into a mono file.

@item stereo
The project is rendered into a stereo file. Channels are panned according to
their given position.
@end table

@item Export
Export the current project.

@item Cancel
Cancels the current action.
@end table

@node The Apply Filter Dialog, , The Export Dialog, Dialogs
@subsection The Apply Filter Dialog

The apply filter dialog is reached from the waveedit window through the right
mouse button menu by choosing the @code{Apply filter...} entry and operates on
the current selection. In the upper part of the dialog, the parameters of the
selected filter are displayed and can be edited.

The lower part of the dialog contains a progress bar for both
preview and apply operation. The following functions are available:

@table @code
@item Preview
This button starts previewing of the selected region with the filter
with the specified parameters applied. To stop previewing press the
preview button again. For most filters you can change parameters while
the preview is active, so you can tune them with realtime feedback.

@item Apply
This button starts applying the filter to the selected region and
closes the dialog after it is finished.

@item Cancel
Cancels the apply filter operation. No changes are made to the
current selection.

@item Help
Pops up the gnome help browser with help on the selected filter.
@end table


