@comment $Id: quickstart.texi,v 1.1 2001/05/21 07:56:19 nold Exp $

@node Quick Start Guide, Graphical Frontend, Copying, Top
@chapter Quick Start Guide

Moi Mr. Newcomer, hi Mrs. Impatient! 

Welcome to GLAME, the GNU/Linux Audio Mechanics. This is the Quick Start Guide
for all those who loathe reading lengthy documentation. So I won't fuzz with
details but try to get you going on basic tasks as fast as possible.

GLAME comes in two flavours, the graphical interface @file{glame} and the
console frontend called @file{cglame}. You'll have to be able to grok Scheme in
order to deal with @file{cglame}. It's extremely cool and powerful but it's
probably not what you are looking for when reading a quick start guide. So let's
talk about the graphical interface in the following, and send those Schemers off
to poke through the proper documentation.

@menu
* Getawaywithher::	A quick start to editing files
* Getmeinthere::	A quick start to audio recording
* Gottagetbetter::	A quick start to filter networks
@end menu

@node Getawaywithher, Getmeinthere,, Quick Start Guide
@section A Quick Start to Editing Files

So you recorded this charming little chanson called Angelina, but she ditched
you the other day and now dates Ron instead? No need to keep waiting until
another Angelina passes your way. GLAME will help you changing your Angelina
tune into a hymn on Heather in an instant. (Admit it, you've been after Heather
for ages!)

Fire up @file{glame}, ignore the crappy splash screen, and what you'll see is
the so-called @dfn{Swapfile GUI}. Don't waste your time pondering about the
name, it's simple a view of all audio tracks that GLAME knows about. Tracks are
kept in a hierarchy of projects and further groups of tracks. To make your sweet
@file{angelina.wav} known to GLAME, first select @dfn{New Project} from the
@dfn{Project} menu. A new entry appears; name it No More Angelina. Then click
the right mouse button on the new entry, and a pop-up menu does what it's name
suggests: it pops up right in front of you. Choose the entry called
@dfn{Import}, and select your @file{angelina.wav}. It's a stereo file, of
course. Therefore the Swapfile GUI now shows two entries within your Angelina
project, one for each track. Now you're all set to wipe poor Angelina if not
from your life, then at least from your art.

Once again, click on the No More Angelina entry in the Swapfile GUI, press the
right mouse button, and select @dfn{Edit} from the pop-up menu. What appears now
is the so-called @dfn{Waveedit GUI}, a window containing a graphical view of the
audio tracks in your project. (Of course you are tempted now to wipe Angelina
from one track only. Well, you could do that by selecting @dfn{Edit} on a single
track rather than the whole project. You could even edit one track in multiple
windows at the same time. But this is not the way we want to go down now. This
Angelina-bitch ditched you, remember? Let's wipe her from your song completely.)

The Waveedit GUI is mostly driven from a pop-up menu attached to the right mouse
button. Have a guess what @dfn{Play All} might do? Well, try it out. If you
can't hear a single note, check your mixer settings with an external mixer
program, and if all seems to be right, go back to the @dfn{Settings} menu in the
Swapfile GUI and check your audio i/o preferences. Working now? Good. Want to
know how zoom in and out work? Ah, no, you figured that out yourself. Now you
have to identify the places in the song where your voice trembles Angelina. To
make it easier for you, during playback a vertical line will mark the region
currently playing. Of course you don't have to keep playing the song as a whole
over and over. There is @dfn{Play Selection} after all. What's a selection?
That's a highlighted region in the editing window. Press the left mouse button,
drag the mouse, release the mouse button again, and you'll get the trick. A lot
of things can be done with selections from the pop-up menu. They can for example
be played, zoomed into, cut, copied, and deleted. The latter is just what we
need now. Select each of the passages enchanting Angelina, deleted them, and
there she goes.

So what about Heather? We'll be with her in an instant, but we have to learn a
bit about recording first.

@node Getmeinthere, Gottagetbetter, Getawaywithher, Quick Start Guide
@section A Quick Start to Audio Recording

Back we are at the Swapfile GUI. Let's add a new project, and name it Oh
Heather. That's where you're going to record into. Well, not quite. You can't
record into a project, of course, you can only record into tracks. So you need to
pull a track out of thin air, two of them actually, as you're going to record
stereo. The right mouse button again acts as your magic wand. It will present
you a menu item @dfn{Add empty wave}, and that's exactly what you need now. Add
two empty tracks, select your Heather project, and open the Waveedit GUI on it,
using the @dfn{Edit} entry in the pop-up menu.

The editing window doesn't look too interesting at the moment but that's what
you'd expect from an empty file. It'll change soon, so go launch your favourite
mixer application, and prepare your system as well as yourself for recording.
Once both of you feel in shape, come back to the editing window. @dfn{Record at
marker} is the preferred item in the pop-up menu now. A panel will appear
containing the four buttons @dfn{Record}, @dfn{Pause}, @dfn{Stop}, and
@dfn{Cancel}. Hitting the first one will start the recording. Finding out about
the meaning of the others is left as an exercise to the reader. Don't think too
hard about it, though, as now is the time to give a c# Heather in your best
tremolo ever. You should've figured out to hit the @dfn{Stop} button by the time
you're done.

The rest is easy. In the Heather editing window, mark a selection only
containing you singing the name but none of the noise before and after. Pop-up
the menu with the right mouse button and hit @dfn{Copy}. Then move over to the
Angelina editing window, which should still be open. A click with the left mouse
button will mark a position in the song, and selecting @dfn{Paste} from the
pop-up menu will insert your Heather at this position. Where to insert the
section is entirely up to your artistic talent.

Not fancy enough to woo Heather, you feel? Read on.

@node Gottagetbetter,, Getmeinthere, Quick Start Guide
@section A Quick Start to Filter Networks

To brush up a selection from the Waveedit GUI, you can apply a single filter on
it. @dfn{Apply Filter} from the pop-up menu gets you going. But you can do even
better. Select @dfn{Apply Custom} and watch the @dfn{Filternetwork Editor} come
up. Here, you can not only apply a single filter, but a whole collection of
filters that interact with each other.

Think of the filter network as a factory of waves. It starts out on one or more
sources of sound waves, mangles the sound they produce, and finally sends it off
to one or several consumers. There is already a source in the network, called
@file{swapfile_in}, and a consumer called @file{swapfile_out}.  Don't mess with
them, as they were already set up by the Waveedit GUI to work on the selection
you marked. It is your task now to build the individual steps in the factory
itself. That is, what should be done to your sound, and in which order. To this
end, you can insert filters into the network. Those are your machines. Just hit
the right mouse button, and select one of the entries. A small icon will appear
depicting your new filter. Each filter has its inputs to the left, and its
outputs to the right. To connect two filters, you draw a line from the output of
the first to the input of the second, dragging the mouse with the left button
pressed down. Some filters do not possess both inputs and outputs. You'll note
this when one side of their icons is greyed out. Inputs and output in general
are not limited to a single connection. A filter will accept as many connections
as it can take, and reject any further.

For most filters, you want to tune their parameters, or their output will
probably not come close to what you intended. Press the right mouse button on
top of the filter image, and select the @dfn{Properties} entry. A new window
will show up, where you can tune the parameters to your liking. Once all
parameters are set, and all filters are connected, hit execute on the icon bar
on top. The already familiar four-button panel will appear, including an
intuitive @dfn{Start} that you most likely want to use now. When processing is
finished, go to the Waveedit GUI, and watch your modified Heather tracks.

What's left to do? Back to the Swapfile GUI. It's about time to finally rename
the No More Angelina project to Hymn to Heather. How? Go figure. You really
should have gotten a good feeling of how GLAME works by now. Next, get the
pop-up menu up on Hymn to Heather. Select @dfn{Export...}, and save your song
as, say, @file{heather.wav}. As you may have guessed, the suffix determines the
type of file Hymn to Heather is stored as. Want details on that one? Hey, enough
is enough! Go read the proper docs if you're that interested. Or try on of the
@dfn{Help} entries that will present you a context sensitive entry from the
manual. 

Well done, you may call yourself a GLAMEr now. A Lamer even, if you don't get up
immediately and present your new song to Heather. Off you go. Good luck!

